---
title: auditory representation
author:
- name: Maarten Steenhagen
  affiliation: university of antwerp
  email: maarten.steenhagen@uantwerpen.be
date: December 2015
abstract: "Source representationalism says that sources of sounds can be represented in perceptual experience by the sounds that reach our ears. It is a distinct form of representationalism about perception. In this paper I advocate the view. I will also identify what may move some to take the source representationalist claim to embody a general insight about our auditory perception of the world."
---

Thanks to sounds, hearing things is possible. But how does this work? Source representationalism, as I will call it, is a view about how sounds enable us to hear things. It says that the sounds that reach our ears can act as perceptual representations of the sources that emit them. Sounds can fulfil a representational function in perception. By fulfilling this function they enable us to hear things, such as people talking, furniture moving, coaches on the street, and so on. Source representationalism is a distinct form of representationalism about perception. It contrasts with any view that holds: (i) that we cannot hear sounds; (ii) that we cannot hear sources of sounds; or (iii) that while we can hear sounds, and can hear sources of sounds, sounds cannot play a representational role in perception. 

In this paper I defend source representationalism. I will show that sounds can act as perceptual representations. The possibility of auditory representation of this form is significant (see §2). That sounds can act as perceptual representations is underscored by taking seriously the possibilities offered by sound recording techniques, as I will demonstrate (see §§3-6). The argument I will develop exploits the possibility of sound reproduction. My claim in this paper is not a universal one. I do not maintain that hearing sound sources is always representational. However, I show that such a stronger, universal conclusion about auditory perception does follow when one makes makes two widely held additional assumptions about the nature of perception (§11). Let me start by outlining how to understand sound sources, and support the assumption that we can hear them in the first place.

##### §1. Sounds and sources

I will suppose that we can hear both sounds and their sources. What do I mean by 'sound sources'? Some material objects or bodies produce sounds when someone or something plays, hits, or otherwise moves them. When they do so these bodies become a source of sound. It is in them and in their activity that sound originates. Take an example. On the 24th of January 24, 1975, Keith Jarrett gave a solo piano concert in Cologne. Jarrett played that night on a badly tuned Bösendorfer piano. The instrument Jarrett played on that occasion was the origin of the sounds that made up his improvised composition. That night, then, that Bösendorfer baby grand was one of the sound sources in the concert venue. 

Sources of sounds come in many kinds. But philosophers today writing on perception typically accept that at least some of the sources of sounds are themselves audible.[^examples] Just as we can see a magpie, or taste vinegar in our salad, we can hear things such as people in the corridor, aeroplanes overhead, and a pub fight down the street. We can hear their sounds as well, of course. But I will suppose we lack a sound reason to adopt the restrictive view, commonly attributed to Berkeley's mouthpiece Philonous in the _Three Dialogues_, that sounds are all we ever hear.[^area]

[^examples]: The acceptance finds a clear voice in @ocallaghan2008aa and @nudds2014aa. Also in psychology it is a commonplace that we can hear more than sounds, see e.g. @cottrell2014aa.
[^area]: See @kalderon2015ac for a useful overview of the different positions in this area.

That we can hear a piano may seem obvious, but how is it possible? Consider, only the sound that reaches us has the auditory qualities of pitch and loudness our ears are sensitive to, not the piano itself. Many authors have felt the need for an explanation here.[^pasnau] The source representationalist maintains that sources of sounds can become audible when they are represented in our perceptual experience. More specifically, they claim that audible sounds in our environment, sounds produced at some point in time and now reaching our ears, can make material objects or bodies audible. According to the source representationalist, those sounds can represent material objects or bodies in perception. That, according to them, is at least a perfectly good way we can hear sources.

[^pasnau]: The seminal paper that has brought this puzzlement to the attention of recent philosophy of perception is @pasnau1999aa. See @ocallaghan2007aa for another influential account of sounds crafted to address the question.

##### §2. Perceptual representation

Before making a case for source representationalism, let me situate the view in the larger debate about the nature of perception. This is helpful, as it brings out why my presentation and defence of the view should be of interest to philosophers of perception. As I said, the very possibility of auditory representation of the form the source representationalist describes may have repercussions for the currently prominent debate about the nature of perception.

On the face of it, the claim that perception can be representational seems mainstream. Yet, the specific way in which the source representationalist advances this claim is interesting for at least two reasons. First, many philosophers nowadays defend or assume a universal thesis, that all perception of objects is representational. When philosophers hear 'representationalism', they typically think of the view that all forms of perception are representational, all of the time. Implicit in this is that representationalism about perception is an all or nothing affair: either all of perception is representational, or none of it is. The source representationalist claim brings out why this is a misleading way of conceiving of the situation. They advance only a weaker claim about perceptual representation, and do so coherently (as I will show shortly). Sounds can represent material objects or bodies in perception, they say. They assert no more than that, potentially, there are circumstances in which perception is representational. In this way, the source representationalist thesis disrupts a tidy way of outlining the shape of the debate about the nature of perception. The logical availability of the view proves how one can coherently maintain that merely some perception is representational. Already this makes it worth understanding the motivations for the position.

There is another reason why source representationalism should be of interest to those thinking about perception. It has a story about what perceptual representation is, or at least about what form it can take. At this point they do not just break lines with the mainstream, but move well beyond it. Many authors have objected to standard representationalist theories of perception that they remain largely silent on what perceptual representations are. Authors typically assume that perception is representational, yet never elucidate what such representation consists in, or what does the representing.[^2] The source representationalist advances a representationalism that embodies an answer to the question what perceptual representations are. If we may believe the source representationalist, sounds are a paradigm example of such representations. As I will show below, the mere sound of the piano played by Jarrett may enable someone to hear that instrument. The presence of the piano itself is not necessary for its audibility. Sounds can confer audibility on their sources in a way that does not depend on the presence of those sources. And such a perceptual function would be representational. As I will spell out in more detail below, sounds can make sources audible in a manner that allows for those sources themselves to be absent from the perceptual situation. In this way, the source representationalist offers us an informative and productive model of thinking about perceptual representation more generally.

[^2]: For a canonical statement of this criticism, see @travis2004aa.

If the source representationalist is right, then sounds, given the way they can function in perception, are perceptual representations, at least potentially. This is a controversial claim, no doubt. But I want to explain why the source representationalist view of about the way we can hear things is attractive and hard to resist.

##### §3. Playing back recorded sounds

Many people will have in their possession the album of Jarrett's performance, published as _The Köln Concert_. The recording enables the reproduction of sounds that an ECM Records engineer captured back in 1975 using a pair of condenser microphones and a portable tape machine. To defend the source-representationalist claim, we only need to reflect on what we can hear when we listen to the playback of a sound recording like this. What is interesting about recordings is that they allow sounds that occurred on an earlier occasion to occur once more.

So what does playing back this recording enable you to hear? Beyond question, it seems to me, is that you can hear the sound of a piano. This particular sound becomes audible as soon as it fills the room when playback starts. It may subtly decompose into individual sounds of piano keys pressed by Jarrett's hands. But these individual sounds too are instances of the sound of a piano.

Despite the fact that there is no piano around, the sound of such an instrument is genuinely there in your room. Somewhat frivolously, we may contrast listening to an ordinary sound recording with a situation in which a device is used that causes us to have auditory hallucinations. The latter device would have caused you to have an hallucinatory episode that could in some subjectively salient respects have resembled listening to Jarrett's solo improvisations, but would have been very different. Not only would there have been no actual piano, there would have be no sound of a piano either. As we could put it, it would at best merely seem to you that you're hearing the sound of a piano, a bit like people suffering from tinnitus seem to hear a buzz or tone. Enjoying a piano recording by means of such an hallucination-provoking device would not involve hearing the sound of a piano. 

Why is this contrast relevant? People who enjoy a recording of Jarrett's concert are typically not hallucinating. If you listen to the album, your perception not merely resembles hearing the sounds of a piano trickling into the room; hearing those sounds is exactly what's going on. The contrast brings out that in listening to a recording, something that the audience heard back in 1974 is part of your current perceptual situation: the sound of a piano. That sound is a 'common factor' present both in listening to Jarrett's improvisations in real life, and in listening to them via a recording. In the hallucination case, it is not obvious that such a common factor would be present. The presence of this common factor motivates the idea that recordings allow sounds that occurred on an earlier occasion to occur once more. The sounds of a piano that were produced in 1974 re-occur each time we play back the recording. 

##### §4. The perceptual role of sounds

Imagine that at night you are woken up by a series of sounds coming from your living room. Reluctant to get out of bed, you listen more carefully to what goes on. Was a window left open, allowing the wind to come in? Is someone down there? Suddenly you hear a set of nailed feet sliding over the wooden floor. You realise it's the cat. The animal must have managed to open the kitchen door again. What is it doing? Again, you listen more carefully, and are able to hear the cat playing with a small object. 

Just by knowing what you're listening to, you are able to attend more determinately to what you hear, and as a result come to hear more, resulting in a better grasp on the situation. This is a clear instance of how knowledge can make you more sensitive to a perceptible environment, thereby enabling you to acquire new knowledge. On the basis of the various recognisable sounds that reach you upstairs, such as a rustle of newspapers, the clattering of some pens falling on the floor, you're able to hear nails, footsteps, a cat, and eventually are able quite reliably to track an animal through the downstairs room. Your perceptual attention, though utterly dependent on the sounds that reach you, doesn't principally go out for those sounds. Perhaps the sounds you hear grab your attention for a brief moment, but you don't pay much heed to them. Instead, you're listening to the cat, and to what _it_ is doing.

Situations like this bring out that we can successfully attend and hence listen both to sounds and what a sound is of [cf. @gaver1993aa; @nudds2014aa]. You started out by hearing just some noises from downstairs, yet ended up listening attentively to a cat engaged in night time play. This describes a shift from attention to sounds themselves to attention to the sources of those sounds, a shift that can become obvious when we reflect on what it is like to have such experience.  The experience of hearing in part has the character it has because we are able to listen to sources as well as sounds. We are so happy to count the kind of experience described above as one of _hearing a cat_ at least in part because the specific determination of the attention that in part constitutes what it is like to perceive things in this way is manifest in experience.

The observation that we can successfully attend and hence listen what a sound is of generalises over both cases of actual listening and cases in which we listen to recorded sounds. This has a straightforward explanation. In both cases we simply use sounds that reach our ears to listen to something beyond them. 

Real-life examples clearly support this generalisation. To find out what had happened in the Boeing 737 that crashed near Pittsburgh on 8 September 1994, a team of audio forensic investigators played back the cockpit voice recorder that was retrieved after the accident. The team was particularly interested in a malfunctioning of the plane's rudders. Hence, it would be mischievous to suggest that they listened merely to the sounds reproduced by their playback equipment. They clearly were paying attention to the plane itself. They eventually found out that the rudder's eventual jamming was not due to inept operation of controls, but occurred because of mechanical obstruction. An  observation like this requires a careful, well-informed 'mining' of an auditory scene, one that was in this case made audible again by replaying the recording. The investigators' finding was made possible because they were able to single out and track through time and space specific items audible via the recorded sound: the plane's rudder, as it locked in its extreme position, and the members of the flight crew as they manipulated the controls.

Although they exercised their capacity to hear parts of a passenger jet with expert precision, the forensic team did not engage in anything that's beyond the pale of ordinary auditory perception or discrimination. In listening to a recording it is possible to focus one's attention on something that goes beyond the heard sound itself [^listening]. If this is correct, then whether one can engage in this mode of attentive listening to sound sources just does not depend on whether one listens to a recording or not. Whether it is a recording or not is simply irrelevant. Instead, the audibility of some concrete individual importantly depends on whether or not one hears the right sounds.

[^listening]: See @siegel2014aa for a discussion of the listening culture of these forensic contexts.

##### §5. Hearing particulars, not hearing facts

In listening to a recording we can listen to and hence hear a sound's source. I want to emphasise that I am talking about perceiving particulars. Hearing a cat is not just a kind of 'epistemic' hearing or 'hearing _that_\lips'. Such epistemic hearing---coming to learn about facts through hearing---surely occurs. Yet we can hear more than just _that_ a sound is of a cat, or _what_ the cat is doing down there. The present point concerns perception of a cat, a particular animal, a form of perception that is arguably more fundamental. I suppose that quite generally we can only hear _that_ such-and-such is the case by hearing some particular thing or other. 

What the above discussion does suggests is that hearing _that_ the cat broke the vase, or _that_ the plane's rudder suffered from mechanical obstruction, is possibly rooted in an experience of hearing particulars that are not themselves sounds: the knowledge you come to have seems explained by your hearing the cat, your hearing its running through the room, and your hearing the vase when it lands and shatters into fragments on the wooden floor.

##### §6. Sounds as perceptual representations

Let me sum up what I have shown so far. By playing back a sound recording at a certain point in time a sound produced earlier in time becomes audible once more. It does so by being reproduced, leading to an actual, audible sound in your environment. These sounds may enable us to hear the original sound source, given that it enables us successfully to listen to that source via the played back sounds. The source representationalist can regard cases like this as clear exemplifications of their view about auditory perception. Now why would such perception be representational, as they maintain?

The answer turns on the way recording technology recreates conditions of audibility. It is typically assumed that a representational dimension of perception would reveal itself whenever things appear to a perceiver that are not present to the senses, or where we have reason to think that the perceptual state a perceiver is in does not depend on such presence [@rowlands2015aa, p. 6; @siegel2010aa, ch. 6]. That is precisely the perceptual situation we may find ourselves in when we listen to a sound source via a recording. For consider, the original source need not be actually there when we play back the recording. The example of Keith Jarrett’s recording, or of the flight recorder, are instances of a phenomenon that by now is completely familiar to us.  

The technology for making sound sources audible by playing back recorded sounds has only become available after Édouard-Léon Scott de Martinville, and later Thomas Edison, conducted their pioneering work on sound recording and reproduction. The late nineteenth century invention of phonograph cylinders first enabled sounds produced at a specific moment in history to be captured, stored, and played back at a later time [cf. @sterne2003aa]. Scott de Martinville's rendition of the French song "Au Clair de la Lune", recorded on 9 April 1860, is said to be the earliest sound sequence in history that was recorded and can be replayed (though at the time of recording it was not yet possible to play back the song). Thanks to the efforts of these early pioneers, we are now able to hear things that are not present and hence absent from our current perceptual situation, and in fact do so on a regular basis. 

Reflection on sound recordings brings out that for a source to become perceptible all that needs to be present is the right sound. The malfunctioning aeroplane parts and crew members were audible months after the craft had crashed. They were audible despite their absence from the perceptual situation. A similar point can be made about the way the recording of the _Köln Concert_ makes a Bösendorfer baby grand audible. This implies that successfully listening to an object does not always require that object to be present in a perceptual situation.

Wherever a kind of perception does not require some or all of its objects to be present to the senses, we may take it to involve a form of representation of those objects. A sound source is represented in someone's perception if their perceptual state does not depend on such presence. That is precisely the perceptual situation we may find ourselves in when we listen to a sound source via a recording. When we listen to a sound source via the played back sounds of a sound recording, our perceptual state does not depend on the presence of the source we hear. That source is to that extent represented in the experience.

##### §7. Recurring states of audibility

If the previous is right, then hearing a sound source via a recording is, as such, representational. The sounds reproduced by the playback device we use represent the source in perception. As we saw, this is because the perception does not depend on the piano's being present. It is important to bring out what I do and do not mean by 'being present'. 

I first want to say what I do not mean. It is at least natural to think that as soon as something is perceived, it is thereby at least in some sense 'present' to us. Was their hearing the rudder not sufficient ground for thinking that, even after the plane had crashed, the rudder was present to the audio forensic investigators? This point is well taken. Just as there is undeniably a sense in which that rudder was not present to them (it was obliterated in a crash), there is at least a sense in which, in virtue of the rudder's being made audible, it was present. The tension here is reflected in the somewhat see-saw way philosophers have throughout history conceived of perceptual representation (we already find this in Aristotle). It seems to have worked its way into the very catchphrase they have come to use to capture the resulting mode of perception: _presence in absence_.

Hearing a piano via a sound recording exemplifies this 'present-in-absence' structure. The point is that, though we indeed hear the piano when we listen to it via a recording, the instrument itself is not there to be perceived---it is no part of the perceptual situation, nor does it need to be. It is in that sense not present to us.[^price]

[^price]: In _Perception_ H.H. Price used the idea of a perceptual situation to capture what we talk about in ordinary perception ascriptions -@price1932aa.

Some may think that the piano's absence from the perceptual situation has to do with the fact that we hear something that happened in the past. That is not quite right, I think. That something existed only in the past does not entail that it is absent from a current perceptual situation, or at least does not obviously entail this. Think of the visual perception of extremely distant astronomical objects. The star Nova Delphinus exploded and vanished more than 10.000 years ago, yet its explosion was clearly visible from Earth during a 27-day period in 2013. Astronomers published the fact widely, as the explosion could be seen in the night's sky by the naked eye. The visible event drew great public interest. May we conclude that the perception of those who saw the explosion was representational? This is not _obvious_. The star, though in the past, needed to be there to sustain the visibility those people were drawn by. 

If there were no significant differences between our perception of Jarrett's piano when we listen to a playback of the recording and our perception of the distant star, then we should conclude that listening to a piano via a recording is not representational, or at least not obviously so. Gideon Rosen brought out to me how revealing the parallel between these two cases may seem at first blush. But it is mistake to take the parallel too seriously. It is a mistake because there clearly is a significant difference. The significant difference between our perception of Jarrett's piano when we listen to a playback of the recording and our perception of the distant super nova lies in the fact that the audibility of the piano in the situation we're considering depends on a revival of something from an earlier situation, whereas our perception of the star does not depend on such a revival [@martin2012aa picks up on this as well]. Playing back a recording doesn't continue a sound, and so doesn't extend what is there for us to perceive back to a time before we pressed play.

This is what I mean by 'present' when I say that, when hearing a piano via a recording, our perceptual state does not depend on the presence of the piano. It is because the light and the vast distance it bridged extends the initial conditions of visibility for that star well into the future. In the auditory case, the initial conditions of audibility are likely to have ceased to be: the sounds may have died out at the end of the concert, and things may have gone silent. When we play back the recording we revive something of the original situation by allowing an original state of audibility to obtain once more---we do not _extend_ that state into the future, but bring it about again. <!-- Careful with this, I've now put this in terms of reviving audibility, and not reviving sounds, though it is plausible to think that once can revive audibility because one can revive sounds. --> (To use a spiritual image, light can make a star visually immortal, whereas recording techniques allow sounds to be reincarnated.) Playback repeats or re-enacts a sound. And although such recreation requires us to reproduce the original sound, it does not require us to reproduce the original source. That _is_ obvious. It is in this sense that we are able to hear the piano in its absence: in order to make that piano audible once more, sounds need to be generated, but the piano itself can remain absent. 

When we listen to a sound source via a recording our perceptual state does not depend on the presence of the source we hear. That source is to that extent represented. We now see why the parallel with the star case was misplaced. Even though the two cases have in common that what we can hear existed in the past, they differ in that in the star case the past object must be still visible, whereas in the recording case the past object need not be still audible. What matters is that it is audible once more. <!-- This is right, and neutral between the liberal and austere metaphysics --> Perhaps a better parallel would be between being now faced with a photograph of Nova Delphinus, currently no longer visible in the sky (at least not from Earth). Just as the sound, it seems, the photograph represents the star in perception, and puts us in a position to look at it once more, despite the fact that the star is now absent from our perceptual situation.

##### §8. Source representationalism

Assuming that there is nothing peculiar about the specific examples we have been considering, we may conclude that whenever we hear a source merely by playing back a sound recording, that source is represented in experience. I have explained why: it is because in such a situation its audibility does not depend on the presence of the piano. In such a situation, sounds can act as perceptual representations. Given the ubiquity of sound recordings, sounds often do fulfil such a representational function in perception. We can hear our friends on our answer phone, a rooster on our alarm clock, athletes when we turn on an Olympic broadcast on TV, and historians of philosophy when putting on a podcast during an evening stroll. This establishes the main claim of the source representationalist: _sounds can represent sources of sound in perception_.

As I have presented and defended the view, source representationalism can be accepted by philosophers of many stripes, as it does not make any specific assumptions about the nature of perceptual experience, or the way such experience comes about. All the source representationalist needs to do is bring to our attention what is entailed by our mundane capacity successfully to listen to and hear sound sources via the sounds they produce, and bring out that we can successfully exercise this capacity also when we listen to played back sound recordings.

I will now do four things. First, I will argue that my defence of source representationalism does not depend on the assumption that sounds in and of themselves are inherently repeatable. Second, I will counter the objection that hearing sources via recordings is not representational, but illusory. I thirdly will address the question how representation of this sort is possible, and fourth and last will identify what further assumptions could move someone to accept the source representationalist claim as a general principle that governs the way sound sources figure in perceptual experience.

##### §9. Must sounds be repeatables?

My case for source representationalism turns on the idea that playing back a sound recording reproduces part of the perceptual conditions of an earlier situation, by re-introducing that part into a current perceptual situation. That part, it should now be clear, consists in the sounds that were audible when the recording was made. Playing back a recording of a piano concert enables us to hear a piano without that piano being present to us---all that needs to be present is its sound. In this way, my argument for source representationalism exploits the possibility of sound reproduction. But I need to emphasise that, apart from these outlines, the source representationalist is not committed to any specific view about sound reproduction. In particular, they need not assume that sounds themselves are inherently repeatable or abstract individuals. 

We may of course think that they are. Some think it is of the nature of sounds that they are inherently reproducible entities.[^repeatable] Something is inherently reproducible only if by its very nature it can 'recur' in history---if it can potentially exist more than once. If sounds are like that, they may be classified as abstract, though this does not mean they are ahistorical. Even as abstract entities sounds could find their origin at some moment in time, and can go of existence for good at another. Another example of such a kind of entity is a photographic image: it comes into being at a specific moment in history, and allows for novel instances in news papers and on web logs.[^tropes] If sounds are abstract like that, then we may suppose that your speakers are able to revive the particular sounds that were produced by a Bösendorfer piano in January 1975. The very sounds audible back then would make themselves heard once more, after leaving your speakers. Through such revival of sound, an original condition or state of audibility of a source can be secured. To my mind it seems that we prephilosophically conceive of sound reproduction in this way, a point that is brought out well in Jonathan Sterne's [-@sterne2003aa] history of sound recording techniques and their reception. 

[^repeatable]: The most explicit proponent I am aware of is M.G.F. -@martin2012aa, but a conception of sounds as abstract individuals is at least implicit in @nuddsxxx and @scrutonxxxx.

[^tropes]: Note, individuals come in several kinds. Sounds seem to me to be events, but photographic images are more plausibly conceived of as complex property instances or tropes.

The previous captures a substantive theory about sound reproduction. I think it is a plausible theory, one that reflects the ambitions and intentions of the inventors of sound recording technology. Yet I need to bring out that the source representationalist is not committed to it. Some authors reject the assumption that sounds are inherently reproducible or abstract.[^casey] Sounds according to them are more like people. Just as it was impossible for Napoleon to live twice, it was impossible for the sounds produced by Jarrett's piano occur again.[^wisdom] The sounds your speakers currently broadcast originate just there, in the corner of your room. They are newcomers that originate in the coppery coils of your tweeters and woofers, and bear no intrinsic relation to sounds that died for good against the walls of the Cologne opera building in 1975. On this conception, a sound heard in 1975 and a sound heard in 2014 must be ontologically distinct, unless it has lasted for over thirty-five years.[^niagara]

[^niagara]: There are examples of such 'old' sounds. Think of the sound of the Niagara Falls.

Our ability to use those sounds to listen to the recorded source does not depend on how we resolve this metaphysical dispute. What matters is that a well-calibrated stereo set can broadcast sounds sufficiently like the sounds that Jarrett's off-key piano produced in 1975.[^causal] This is because all that is needed is the revival or recreation of an initial state of audibility. And for that, all that is needed is the production of sounds that have the relevant audible characteristics in common with the original, recorded sounds. Both parties can accept that this is possible. In listening to a recording of Jarrett's piano concert you find yourself at least in a very similar auditory situation as the original audience back in 1975, similar enough for Jarrett's piano and performance to become audible once more. Your speakers need to produce sounds that can fulfil the same perceptual function as the original sounds---making a piano audible to you---while fulfilling this function in the absence of any actual piano in your current perceptual situation. 

Regardless of whether we think sounds are abstract individuals or not, the possibility of sound reproduction can be accepted. A sound recording can, when played back, revive an original condition of audibility simply by making a source that was audible in the past audible once more.

[^casey]: For example, in discussion Casey O'Callaghan has expressed his scepticism to me about the idea that sounds are abstract individuals.

[^causal]: Some may even emphasise here that there may be a causal or explanatory relation between them: the sounds sound the way they do because the original sounds sounded the way they did. It is in this way that even on the austere conception the piano we hear counts as the source of the sounds played back when we listen to the recording.

[^wisdom]: Someone who is convinced of the possibility of human reincarnation may disagree with this of course. John Wisdom, in _Problems of Mind and Matter_, proposes that we think of persons as abstract individuals as well [-@wisdom1934aa].

##### §10. What is representation?
 
Once we accept that sources can be represented in perception in the way the source representationalist maintains, we may wonder what makes perceptual representation of this kind possible. 

Given that few people have difficulty listening to sound sources via sound recordings, it seems that we possess either a natural or acquired capacity for representational perception.[^whycapacity] What is the nature of that capacity? One thing we can say is that, just as other perceptual capacities, the capacity for representational hearing is exercised in response to something.[^reactive] 

[^whycapacity]: I speak of a capacity advisedly. Merely hearing a recorded sound is clearly not sufficient for hearing its source. It took the audio forensic experts some effort to discern in the sounds they could hear perfectly well the sources they were interested in. This suggests that our perception of sources by means of recorded sounds is an exercise of an ability or skill, something that points in the direction of a perceptual capacity of sorts. 

[^reactive]: We may think of it as a _reactive_ capacity as described in @kalderon2015aa. Kalderon borrows the term from Nietzsche, but traces the idea back at least as far as Aristotle. 

Here is how that works. We can safely assume that, quite generally, what we can hear is at least in part determined by the audible character of the sounds we perceive. Things sound the way they do to us in part because the sounds that reach our ears have the qualities they have. If the sound reproduced by the speakers in your room did not have audible qualities of the right kind, then hearing that sound would not enable you to hear a piano at all. The sounds might have come out all garbled, or stretched out or contracted extremely, such that all you were able to hear were some noises. When your equipment is functioning well, the sounds you hear and the qualities it has in part explain why, in the absence of a piano, you are able to hear such an instrument. We are able to hear a piano in its absence only because we possess the technology to reproduce sounds that have the right characteristics. 

On the source representationalist picture as I have reconstructed it, audible sound figures as an essential cog in the machinery of representation in auditory perception. The sound we can hear plays a determining role in the exercise of this capacity.[^oversight] It is in this sense that those sounds themselves are auditory representations, at least potentially. They are objects of perception that fulfil a representative function in perception---some use the term 'representational vehicle'. A sound, reaching our ears, may enable you to exercise your capacity for representational perception. 

[^oversight]: This is not infrequently overlooked, see e.g. @tolliver2007aa, p. 143].

We may contrast this with two alternative pictures of auditory representation. The first focuses on the sound recording, as a store of auditory information, and identifies it as what represents the sound source when we are able to hear it in its absence. The second is a psychologising move, one that conceives of perceptual representations as mental entities, and so maintains that what represents the sound source is such a mental state. The source representationalist need not deny either of these two pictures, nor need they sign up to them. What matters is that the case for source representationalism I have been sketching makes much of the need to play back sounds, and conceives of sounds as an essential cog in the machinery of representation in auditory perception.å

Note that the source representationalist also can remain neutral about what it is about a sound, as an object of audition, that lets it take on such a representative attire. The view leaves open what shape such answers or explanations take. Some explanations will refer to properties of the sound, other to properties of the way we perceive the sound. For example, someone might think that a sound produced by a piano represents a piano in perception if and only if it has the typical audible characteristics of the sound of a piano. They identify features of the sound itself as necessary and sufficient for its representational role. But someone else may think that the conditions for representation are psychological, and maintain that a sound produced by a piano represents a piano in perception if and only if the perceiver hears the sound as the sound of a piano (Matthew Nudds has defended that hearing a sound in that way is necessary for hearing a source)<!-- check ref-->. I want to leave such questions open. If the previous discussion is along the right lines, then whatever account we give of the characteristics of sounds, or of perceptual representations more generally, we do possess a psychological capacity to make use of them. Hearing sounds with the right character puts one in a position to exercise this capacity.

##### §11.  The scope of auditory representation

How far does it go? I have established that hearing a piano merely by listening to a recording of its sound is representational. The sounds you hear represent that piano to you in perception. But the presence of sound is of course ubiquitous. Even the most simple case of hearing depend on your perception of sound. When a coach drives down your street, you can hear it only because its sound manages to invade your study. Also situations where audibility does not depend on any recordings, sounds seem to play a pivotal role in conferring audibility on the material objects and events in the world around us. So does this mean that also when we hear something 'in real life', without the intervention of sound recording technologies, our perception is representational? 

I have come to see that it does not. It may of course turn out that the audibility of sound sources in general should be conceived of as depending on the representational function of sound, but such a conclusion does not follow from what I have said so far. I first want to explain in more detail why it does not follow, and then identify two further assumptions the source representationalist is not committed to, but that would enable us to generalise their view, and draw the conclusion that all hearing of sources is representational.

Let me  bring out why it does not follow from what I've established so far that also when we hear something in real life our perception is representational. To be sure, hearing via a recording and hearing in real life have something in common. They at least share a common factor, in the form of a sound that makes a piano audible. This may make it seem plausible that in real life hearing sound fulfils just that role. To explain our ability to hear objects in our environment, it may be thought, all we need to rely on it the material suggested by the source representationalist. However, the inference is at best abductive. __It doesn't rule out that hearing a piano in real life is a fundamentally different kind of experience from hearing a piano via a recording.__ When you're listening to a recording the piano need not be present in just the sense it needs to be present when you're listening to it live in a concert venue. This means that, just on the basis of what we've said so far, someone might agree that hearing via recordings is representational, because here the audibility of sound sources does not depend on the presence of those sources, yet they may still emphasise that in many completely ordinary cases the sources of the sounds we hear are present in the perceptual situation.   

So the reason it didn't follow, as I explained, was roughly that the presence of a sound source to the perceptual situation may make a difference to the nature of our perception that as of yet we have not considered. However, additional assumptions may defuse this concern by ruling out that this presence could make a difference. Such assumptions, then, may justify  someone to accept that all hearing of sources is representational. In what follows I want to identify two such assumptions that seem at least common among philosophers of perception.

One such assumption is about the phenomenology of perception. Some assume that what it is like to undergo an experience fixes its character in a way that invalidates the previous suggestion.[^firstassumption] This is because hearing in real life can be _indistinguishable_ from hearing via a recording. Think of those talented musicians in the bowels of London's Underground. At some distance, you may doubt whether they are actually strumming their guitar or are using a recording played covertly. In such a state of doubt, reflecting on what one hears may not be sufficient to distinguish between the two possible scenarios, because for any *original* experience of a sound actually produced by the source one hears, we can specify a conceivable, indiscriminable *recording counterpart* in which we would hear that source through a recording instead. In both scenarios we would hear the same audible qualities, and so they may to that extend have the same phenomenal character. If that is right, then for every original experience there is a recording counterpart that does not differ in phenomenal character.  The observation is based on the mere possibility of doubting that what one hears is not a recording. But if we accept it, we may take the lack of difference in phenomenology to entail a lack of difference in representational properties. This would mean that also the original experience is representational, given that its indiscriminable recording counterpart would be, regardless of the fact that in the one case the original source of the sounds is actually situated in the perceiver's environment. 

[^firstassumption]: Here's a list of people who make this assumption in print. 

Some will go along with this. But the argument is conditional on a dubious assumption, an assumption the source representationalist as such is not committed to. Many will not be impressed by this argument, because subjective indistinguishability is generally no adequate criterion of sameness.[^indistinguishability] There seems no good reason to suppose that  the domain of psychology is and exception. Why couldn't two entirely different sorts of experiences nonetheless be indistinguishable for someone who is having them? If they could, then we have as of yet no reason to think that ordinary hearing of sources is representational. 

[^indistinguishability]: See XXX for a good discussion of this point about indistinguishability. 

There is another assumption that goes beyond what the source representationalist as such is committed to, but that can motivate someone to accept source representationalism as a general thesis about our auditory perception of sources of sounds. It is a common starting point that among the objects of perception some are special, and they are special because they 'pull the cart', so to say. These 'proper' objects, because of the qualities they possess, determine the character of the experience. Such objects and only such objects constitutively determine the character of experience, just by being the way they are. To determine the character in that way just is to be present. Presence is, to pick up on an ancient metaphor, to leave a mark in experience, and only objects with the right kind of qualities are able to do that. The assumption we then need to make is that, _for auditory perception, only sounds have the power to do so_. That assumption has in fact been an important pillar in many classics in the philosophy of perception.[^secondassumption] From this it follows that sound sources are always heard in their absence. We don't need to drag along that piano, because it was never what was doing the work, perceptually, nor could it have done that work. 

[^secondassumption]: And here's a list of those who make the more general assumption about proper objects. And see XXX and XXX for people who specifically think about sounds in this way.

Earlier I noted that people who enjoy a recording of Jarrett's concert are typically not hallucinating. If you listen to the album, your perception not merely resembles hearing the sounds of a piano trickling into the room; hearing those sounds is exactly what's going on. The contrast brought out that in listening to a recording, something that the audience heard back in 1974 is part of your current perceptual situation: the sound of a piano. That sound is a 'common factor' present both in listening to Jarrett's improvisations in real life, and in listening to them via a recording. The current assumption enables us to play up the significance of this common factor. Having an experience in which this factor is present _just is_ what it is to hear, and so the sound source, though potentially audible, has itself no part to play in the perception. This gives us a neat explanation of the possibility of perception-via-recording. 

There is more to say for this assumption, I think, than for the assumption about indistinguishably. Historically, the framework of proper objects has been influential. However, also this assumption is controversial, and can be resisted without damaging the central tenet of source representationalism that sounds can represent sources.

##### §12.  Conclusion

This concludes my case for source representationalism. I have presented an argument that should be accepted by philosophers of perception of many stripes, and have clarified what the source representationalist is and is not committed to. If what I have argued is right, then it means that perception does not require the presence of all of its objects. Hearing is a form of perception. If the source representationalist is right, then assuming that the objects of perception need to be present to the perceiver is too simple. Yet this assumption is not uncommonly made. For example, Charles Travis exploits it to motivate his bafflement at the very idea that perception is representational. He agrees that representations do not depend on the presence of their objects, yet takes it to be undeniable that, as he writes, 

> _perception_, as such, simply places our surroundings in view, affords us awareness of them [...] It confronts us with what is there...[@travis2013aa, p. 65]
 
We may have some sympathy for Travis' conviction if we remind ourselves that he explicitly limits his discussion of perception to vision, given that, arguably, the possibility for perceptual representation are most clearly manifest in audition---a path I have pursued in this paper. As the source representationalist sees it, perception affords us more than Travis thinks is possible. When we are confronted with a played back sound, some wholly distinct object or scene may become audible once again. This enables us to perceive something that need not actually be present there at all. It is for this reason that perception, as such, can do more than simply placing our surroundings in view.

It is perhaps telling that Travis restricts his discussion of perception to observations about vision. He does not consider other sensory modalities. In particular, Travis omits reference to those senses that for their functioning as distal senses depend on what we could call perceptual mediators, such as sounds. M.G.F. Martin writes that: “What puts vision apart from hearing, smell, and taste is that we do not conceive of the visible world as offering us primary objects of visual awareness and attention distinct from concrete objects through which we come to see the concrete” [@martin2012aa, p. 334]. It is precisely this possibility of mediation by that our advanced sound recording techniques exploit. 

The possibility of perceptual representation in auditory perception stands out in this way only because we have available to us the technology to separate our sound and source. 

It is tempting to think that precisely because of his focus on vision, Travis was bound from the outset to reach only a partial understanding of what perception, as such, can do.

<!-- (Presence does not equate with existence; it may very well be that the piano must have existed at some point in time. Presence also doesn't equate with awareness. No, as I am thinking of it, an object of perception is present only if Y, and Y isn't entailed by the play-back of a recording, while such a play-back suffices to make an object audible.) And Y = If the object is perceptible at t1, then if it were zapped out of existence at t2, making the object perceptible once more at t3 would not be possible without reintroducing the object itself again. -->


\subsection*{References}
